# `symtable` — Access to the compiler’s symbol tables

**Source code:** [Lib/symtable.py](https://github.com/python/cpython/tree/main/Lib/symtable.py)

---

Symbol tables are generated by the compiler from AST just before bytecode is
generated.  The symbol table is responsible for calculating the scope of every
identifier in the code.  `symtable` provides an interface to examine these
tables.

## Generating Symbol Tables

### symtable.symtable(code, filename, compile_type, , module=None)

Return the toplevel [`SymbolTable`](#symtable.SymbolTable) for the Python source *code*.
*filename* is the name of the file containing the code.  *compile_type* is
like the *mode* argument to [`compile()`](functions.md#compile).
The optional argument *module* specifies the module name.
It is needed to unambiguous [filter](warnings.md#warning-filter) syntax warnings
by module name.

#### Versionadded
Added in version 3.15: Added the *module* parameter.

## Examining Symbol Tables

### *class* symtable.SymbolTableType

An enumeration indicating the type of a [`SymbolTable`](#symtable.SymbolTable) object.

#### MODULE *= "module"*

Used for the symbol table of a module.

#### FUNCTION *= "function"*

Used for the symbol table of a function.

#### CLASS *= "class"*

Used for the symbol table of a class.

The following members refer to different flavors of
[annotation scopes](../reference/executionmodel.md#annotation-scopes).

#### ANNOTATION *= "annotation"*

Used for annotations if `from __future__ import annotations` is active.

#### TYPE_ALIAS *= "type alias"*

Used for the symbol table of [`type`](../reference/simple_stmts.md#type) constructions.

#### TYPE_PARAMETERS *= "type parameters"*

Used for the symbol table of [generic functions](../reference/compound_stmts.md#generic-functions)
or [generic classes](../reference/compound_stmts.md#generic-classes).

#### TYPE_VARIABLE *= "type variable"*

Used for the symbol table of the bound, the constraint tuple or the
default value of a single type variable in the formal sense, i.e.,
a TypeVar, a TypeVarTuple or a ParamSpec object (the latter two do
not support a bound or a constraint tuple).

#### Versionadded
Added in version 3.13.

### *class* symtable.SymbolTable

A namespace table for a block.  The constructor is not public.

#### get_type()

Return the type of the symbol table.  Possible values are members
of the [`SymbolTableType`](#symtable.SymbolTableType) enumeration.

#### Versionchanged
Changed in version 3.12: Added `'annotation'`,  `'TypeVar bound'`, `'type alias'`,
and `'type parameter'` as possible return values.

#### Versionchanged
Changed in version 3.13: Return values are members of the [`SymbolTableType`](#symtable.SymbolTableType) enumeration.

The exact values of the returned string may change in the future,
and thus, it is recommended to use [`SymbolTableType`](#symtable.SymbolTableType) members
instead of hard-coded strings.

#### get_id()

Return the table’s identifier.

#### get_name()

Return the table’s name.  This is the name of the class if the table is
for a class, the name of the function if the table is for a function, or
`'top'` if the table is global ([`get_type()`](#symtable.SymbolTable.get_type) returns `'module'`).
For type parameter scopes (which are used for generic classes, functions,
and type aliases), it is the name of the underlying class, function, or
type alias. For type alias scopes, it is the name of the type alias.
For [`TypeVar`](typing.md#typing.TypeVar) bound scopes, it is the name of the `TypeVar`.

#### get_lineno()

Return the number of the first line in the block this table represents.

#### is_optimized()

Return `True` if the locals in this table can be optimized.

#### is_nested()

Return `True` if the block is a nested class or function.

#### has_children()

Return `True` if the block has nested namespaces within it.  These can
be obtained with [`get_children()`](#symtable.SymbolTable.get_children).

#### get_identifiers()

Return a view object containing the names of symbols in the table.
See the [documentation of view objects](stdtypes.md#dict-views).

#### lookup(name)

Lookup *name* in the table and return a [`Symbol`](#symtable.Symbol) instance.

#### get_symbols()

Return a list of [`Symbol`](#symtable.Symbol) instances for names in the table.

#### get_children()

Return a list of the nested symbol tables.

### *class* symtable.Function

A namespace for a function or method.  This class inherits from
[`SymbolTable`](#symtable.SymbolTable).

#### get_parameters()

Return a tuple containing names of parameters to this function.

#### get_locals()

Return a tuple containing names of locals in this function.

#### get_globals()

Return a tuple containing names of globals in this function.

#### get_nonlocals()

Return a tuple containing names of explicitly declared nonlocals in this function.

#### get_frees()

Return a tuple containing names of [free (closure) variables](../glossary.md#term-closure-variable)
in this function.

#### get_cells()

Return a tuple containing names of [cell variables](../glossary.md#term-closure-variable) in this table.

#### Versionadded
Added in version 3.15.

### *class* symtable.Class

A namespace of a class.  This class inherits from [`SymbolTable`](#symtable.SymbolTable).

#### get_methods()

Return a tuple containing the names of method-like functions declared
in the class.

Here, the term ‘method’ designates *any* function defined in the class
body via [`def`](../reference/compound_stmts.md#def) or [`async def`](../reference/compound_stmts.md#async-def).

Functions defined in a deeper scope (e.g., in an inner class) are not
picked up by [`get_methods()`](#symtable.Class.get_methods).

For example:

<!-- import warnings
context = warnings.catch_warnings()
context.__enter__()
warnings.simplefilter("ignore", category=DeprecationWarning) -->
<!-- context.__exit__() -->
```pycon
>>> import symtable
>>> st = symtable.symtable('''
... def outer(): pass
...
... class A:
...    def f():
...        def w(): pass
...
...    def g(self): pass
...
...    @classmethod
...    async def h(cls): pass
...
...    global outer
...    def outer(self): pass
... ''', 'test', 'exec')
>>> class_A = st.get_children()[2]
>>> class_A.get_methods()
('f', 'g', 'h')
```

Although `A().f()` raises [`TypeError`](exceptions.md#TypeError) at runtime, `A.f` is still
considered as a method-like function.

#### Deprecated-removed
Deprecated since version 3.14, will be removed in version 3.16.

### *class* symtable.Symbol

An entry in a [`SymbolTable`](#symtable.SymbolTable) corresponding to an identifier in the
source.  The constructor is not public.

#### get_name()

Return the symbol’s name.

#### is_referenced()

Return `True` if the symbol is used in its block.

#### is_imported()

Return `True` if the symbol is created from an import statement.

#### is_parameter()

Return `True` if the symbol is a parameter.

#### is_type_parameter()

Return `True` if the symbol is a type parameter.

#### Versionadded
Added in version 3.14.

#### is_global()

Return `True` if the symbol is global.

#### is_nonlocal()

Return `True` if the symbol is nonlocal.

#### is_declared_global()

Return `True` if the symbol is declared global with a global statement.

#### is_local()

Return `True` if the symbol is local to its block.

#### is_annotated()

Return `True` if the symbol is annotated.

#### Versionadded
Added in version 3.6.

#### is_free()

Return `True` if the symbol is referenced in its block, but not assigned
to.

#### is_cell()

Return `True` if the symbol is referenced but not assigned in a nested block.

#### Versionadded
Added in version 3.15.

#### is_free_class()

Return *True* if a class-scoped symbol is free from
the perspective of a method.

Consider the following example:

```python3
def f():
    x = 1  # function-scoped
    class C:
        x = 2  # class-scoped
        def method(self):
            return x
```

In this example, the class-scoped symbol `x` is considered to
be free from the perspective of `C.method`, thereby allowing
the latter to return *1* at runtime and not *2*.

#### Versionadded
Added in version 3.14.

#### is_assigned()

Return `True` if the symbol is assigned to in its block.

#### is_comp_iter()

Return `True` if the symbol is a comprehension iteration variable.

#### Versionadded
Added in version 3.14.

#### is_comp_cell()

Return `True` if the symbol is a cell in an inlined comprehension.

#### Versionadded
Added in version 3.14.

#### is_namespace()

Return `True` if name binding introduces new namespace.

If the name is used as the target of a function or class statement, this
will be true.

For example:

```python3
>>> table = symtable.symtable("def some_func(): pass", "string", "exec")
>>> table.lookup("some_func").is_namespace()
True
```

Note that a single name can be bound to multiple objects.  If the result
is `True`, the name may also be bound to other objects, like an int or
list, that does not introduce a new namespace.

#### get_namespaces()

Return a list of namespaces bound to this name.

#### get_namespace()

Return the namespace bound to this name. If more than one or no namespace
is bound to this name, a [`ValueError`](exceptions.md#ValueError) is raised.

<a id="symtable-cli"></a>

## Command-Line Usage

#### Versionadded
Added in version 3.13.

The `symtable` module can be executed as a script from the command line.

```sh
python -m symtable [infile...]
```

Symbol tables are generated for the specified Python source files and
dumped to stdout.
If no input file is specified, the content is read from stdin.

<!-- Apparently this how you hack together a formatted link:
(https://www.docutils.org/docs/ref/rst/directives.html#replacement-text) -->
