# `tabnanny` — Detection of ambiguous indentation

**Source code:** [Lib/tabnanny.py](https://github.com/python/cpython/tree/main/Lib/tabnanny.py)

---

For the time being this module is intended to be called as a script. However it
is possible to import it into an IDE and use the function [`check()`](#tabnanny.check)
described below.

#### NOTE
The API provided by this module is likely to change in future releases; such
changes may not be backward compatible.

### tabnanny.check(file_or_dir)

If *file_or_dir* is a directory and not a symbolic link, then recursively
descend the directory tree named by *file_or_dir*, checking all `.py`
files along the way.  If *file_or_dir* is an ordinary Python source file, it
is checked for whitespace related problems.  The diagnostic messages are
written to standard output using the [`print()`](functions.md#print) function.

### tabnanny.verbose

Flag indicating whether to print verbose messages. This is incremented by the
`-v` option if called as a script.

### tabnanny.filename_only

Flag indicating whether to print only the filenames of files containing
whitespace related problems.  This is set to true by the `-q` option if called
as a script.

### *exception* tabnanny.NannyNag

Raised by [`process_tokens()`](#tabnanny.process_tokens) if detecting an ambiguous indent. Captured and
handled in [`check()`](#tabnanny.check).

### tabnanny.process_tokens(tokens)

This function is used by [`check()`](#tabnanny.check) to process tokens generated by the
[`tokenize`](tokenize.md#module-tokenize) module.

<!-- XXX document errprint, format_witnesses, Whitespace, check_equal, indents,
reset_globals -->

#### SEE ALSO
Module [`tokenize`](tokenize.md#module-tokenize)
: Lexical scanner for Python source code.

<!-- Apparently this how you hack together a formatted link:
(https://www.docutils.org/docs/ref/rst/directives.html#replacement-text) -->
